---
layout: post
title:  "Some bad early career heuristics"
date:   2024-08-16 01:45
categories: general
---

Early in your career, when you don't have a ton of external signal, what are the right heuristics to optimize for? Aside from the standard life satisfaction, personal curiosity, etc. etc., here are a few that I think are common but incorrect, and that I've been guilty of at one point or another:

- (1) *Being the youngest in a room*. Between the 5-year-old piano prodigies and the Terence Taos of the world, many of us have experienced that almost-visceral reaction to meeting someone that is both younger than you, but also undeniably better. I think that, for people who got into fields at a young age, it's easy to keep optimizing for being the youngest person in a given meeting, conference, or group. After all, it's easy to keep feeling like a prodigal success, and you can chalk up your shortcomings to inexperience and naivete. But at some point (and I can't remember who first phrased it to me this way) you have to graduate from being *good for your age* to just, well, *good*.
- (2) Along the same vein, *being the only woman in the room*. Most of my female friends agree that in the workplace, another woman -- a manager, an interviewer, etc. -- can either be your best friend or worst enemy. While many more-senior women put substantial and admirable effort into lifting up the young women in their organization, I've also heard dozens of horror stories of extra-cruel woman-woman workplace encounters. My guess is that, especially in older generations, women who managed to break glass ceilings were very used to being in rooms full of men; in fact, they might even have implicitly learned that a male-dominated space symbolizes a higher bar of achievement. But subconsciously, that heuristic can lead one to be threatened by female colleagues or even proteges.
- (3) This is mainly for early-career researchers, but *having the most novel ideas*. It's natural to be disappointed when you're scooped, or when an exciting idea you had was published six months ago, but if you genuinely came up with those ideas on your own, I think this is actually a strong signal that you're on the right track. From calculus to the expanding universe, important discoveries are often made in parallel, with discoverers following similar breadcrumb trails. Completely novel ideas could be major breakthroughs, but they could just as well be signals of blindspots in your understanding (if the idea is infeasible) or taste (if the idea is just uninteresting). 
- (4) Obviously, *easy confirmation*. I often think about how my peers at Stanford, due to the nature of college admissions, have experienced much less failure in their lives. I think it's extremely important to be able to confront negative feedback head-on, and even to seek it out. This is a really uncomfortable process, so I'll admit I'm guilty of being less willing to do experiments that could prove me wrong, or find papers that debunk my idea. Of course, seeking counterfactuals can only make your work itself stronger, even if it takes a little more digging to find the right idea. A top priority of mine is to embrace confusion and failure in this regard.