---
layout: post
title:  "Environmental equity: why your research sub-field matters"
date:   2024-08-25 12:54
categories: general
---

In hindsight, I was very fortunate that gravitational-wave astronomy was the astrophysics sub-field I happened to stumble into some 5-ish years ago. Although gravitational waves are a natural corollary to Einstein's General Relativity, which is well past its hundred-year anniversary, actual gravitational waves were first detected in 2015. So I had the fortune of being in a young, rapidly expanding, well-funded field of research, in which the rules were still being written and the possibilities were seemingly endless. 

I believe I benefited from what I'll call **environmental equity**. This riffs off the traditional concept of equity in an asset or corporation. Imagine you work at a startup that undergoes massive growth; you benefit from this growth because the value of your equity increases. Something similar happens if you work in a field of research that is new and high-growth. Earlier ideas tend to be both more foundational and somewhat easier to find, so your impact is broader; if people are actively entering the field, your ideas grow with the field itself. Opportunities and their scope naturally grow not only as your career progresses, but also as the field itself grows. And because the field's "paradigm" (in the Kuhn *Structure* sense) is still unclear, *everyone* is more inclined to try things and embrace audacious ideas. All else equal, this can effectively multiply your effectiveness and impact as a researcher, and also make the actual process more exciting.

In contrast, imagine working in a stagnating field of research. New ideas are scarce, so politics and infighting is more likely. The problems are still valuable, of course, but likely much narrower in scope. The "paradigm" is already 10-20 years old, so exciting directions that don't fit are unlikely to get serious consideration. It's likely that significant funding has already been allocated towards experiments and collaborations, further pruning the tree of exploration. My personal taste, at least, leans away from working on calcified ideas with diminishing marginal returns to effort.

Of course, the *novelty* of research is not perfectly correlated with the *impact* of research, but in my experience fields with more environmental equity to go around also tend to be solving genuinely interesting problems -- that's what draws people to problems! And you shouldn't feel pressured to work in high-impact, high-growth fields that are just not personally interesting to you. But I know I'll be seriously considering environmental equity as I pick my future research directions.