---
layout: post
title:  "Notes from Berlin"
date:   2025-01-08 11:14
categories: personal
---

From September to December 2024 I lived and studied in Berlin. I learned the basics of German (*ja, ich spreche Deutsch*), lived independently in the city, clocked ~35 hours in Berghain, spent noctural weekends powered by U-Bahn station croissants, and saw unfamiliar parts of both the world and myself.

To call it educational is an understatement; I genuinely feel that it was transformative. I think through the stark contrast with my "normal" life at Stanford, living in Berlin amplified the personal evolution I've undergone in recent years. It was very refreshing to be removed from the intense landscape of campus (and broader SF) -- ambition-obsessed, workaholic, often judgmental or at least anonymity-free -- and to have the breathing room to grow. I relied a lot on my "when in Berlin" mentality to justify, or push myself towards, risk-taking and unfamiliar-feeling adventures.

I think if I had nothing tying me to the U.S., I would move to Berlin. 

I. on "normalcy", personal plasticity, and situational selves

The first observation I made was how different I felt after just a few weeks in Berlin. 

II. on the joys of self destruction and construction

III. on flirting with extremes

IV. on self-expression and the good life

V. on subjective sensation and the chasm of understanding

VI. on techno
    - the impact of techno
    - how i felt while dancing 
    - community
    - contrastive acceptance
    - 